[DOCS] Add ES security principles (#76850)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/security/es-security-principles.asciidoc

[[es-security-principles]]
== {es} security principles
Protecting your {es} cluster and the data it contains is of utmost importance.
There are numerous security practices and considerations for keeping your

> cluster safe, such as not saving passwords in plain text files or making sure

Author: @bytebilly, I'm good with adding the actions that users _should_ do instead of what not to do. I tried to reframe each of the section titles around the user action such as **Run Elasticsearch with security enabled** instead of **Do not run Elasticsearch without security**, which is also more positive. I think we can extend that mantra to this additional section as well. What are the principles that you want to add? Are you thinking of something like, **Use secure settings whenever possible**?

> cluster safe, such as not saving passwords in plain text files or making sure

Reviewer: Yes, we could also link the secure settings documentation. I like the idea to use positive messages for all sections!

> cluster safe, such as not saving passwords in plain text files or making sure

Reviewer 2: The first paragraph feels little flowery compared to the fairly direct "don't put it on the internet, even with security enabled" kinds of advice you give below.

> cluster safe, such as not saving passwords in plain text files or making sure

Author: @nik9000, I think you're right that stronger language is appropriate here. I'm thinking something like:
>Protecting your {es} cluster and the data it contains is of utmost importance. The following principles are foundational to running {es} in a secure manner and should be integrated into every production deployment of {es}.

> cluster safe, such as not saving passwords in plain text files or making sure

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me.

that users have appropriate permissions (most users shouldn't be a superuser).
These guidelines are important, but the following information provides something
greater. These principles are foundational to running {es} in a secure manner.

[discrete]
[[security-dont-run-without]]
=== Run {es} with security enabled
Never run an {es} cluster without security enabled. This principle cannot be
overstated. Running {es} without security leaves your cluster exposed to anyone

> on the internet, permitting anyone to download, modify, or delete any data in

Reviewer 2: It leaves the cluster exposed to anyone who can hit ES packets. It's not the whole internet. Its still bad. Even if you trust everyone who can hit your production cluster you still want security in depth. And you probably shouldn't blindly trust everyone who can hit your production cluster.

Author: We could modify this to say:
>Running {es} without security leaves your cluster exposed to anyone who can access {es} packets, permitting these individuals to download, modify, or delete any data in your cluster.

Is "packets" the right term here? There are communications on the HTTP layer and on the transport layer, and I want to encapsulate both. Is "network traffic" more appropriate?

Reviewer 2: "network traffic" is probably more right. Something like "anyone who send send network traffic to {es}"

"accessing packets" that makes me think of [wireshark](https://www.wireshark.org/). That's another whole kettle of fish. Probably not worth bringing up.

Mostly pedantic, but: in production folks that run ES are going to do it on a wired network. No "accessing packets" unless you own the hardware or the wires. If someone's up in your data center playing with your wires you are pretty well out of luck. Or the cloud equivalent. We've got TLS and you should use it, but if physical access crumples all of the depth we might have. Which is known. So its mostly not worth talking about.

One thing is semi-related is that ES only binds to localhost by default. This is because lots and lots of folks are starting it on their laptop. Folks like me hack ES locally, or write docs for it, or hack apps that talk to it. Or they slurp small data and use ES to slice it locally. Happens all the time. Laptops usually are on networks with fairly poor security. Public wifi. My house. localhost doesn't listen to anything outside of your laptop. That's good. Super good when `elastic:password` is a superuser.

your cluster.
<<configuring-stack-security,Start the {stack} with security enabled>> or
<<manually-configure-security,manually configure security>> to prevent
unauthorized access to your clusters and ensure that internode communication
is secure. 

[discrete]
[[security-dont-expose]]
=== Protect {es} from public internet traffic
Even with security enabled, never expose {es} to public internet traffic.
Using an application to sanitize requests to {es} still poses risks, such as
a malicious user writing <<search,`_search`>> requests that could overwhelm an
{es} cluster and bring it down. If you need to connect devices from the internet
to {es}, use some combination of a proxy, firewall, and VPN. The best

> combination of these technologies depends on your security needs and risks.

Reviewer 2: Not exposing ES to the internet is another defense in depth thing - sure, security should stop folks from reading it without a password, but the internet is not a safe place. Layers.

Now, talking about a proxy bothers me because it makes me think of something like [squid](https://wiki.squid-cache.org/SquidFaq/ReverseProxy). It's a proxy, but it's not going to give you any security if you put it between ES and the internet. Not if you let `_search` through. Our advice below about using an application to mediate access to ES is really the right way to go here.

Even if your users aren't the whole internet, the application mediating searches is very good. It basically forces you to code review all the requests you'll send to ES. That's good for stability. Our old advice mentioned sanitizing requests. I think this is ultimately pretty futile and I'd drop it. You won't sanitize everything.

Sometimes an admin will have to "go around" your application to do some one off stuff. Or a script will do it for them. And *that* is where the VPN/firewall/jump box/terraform stuff comes into play. I'm not sure it's worth calling out specific solutions because they will feel out of date pretty quick. Separate networks with a firewall was the was we isolated Oracle from our application servers years ago. I imagine the cool kids are doing this with k8s configuration now.

Just talk about keeping ES network isolated from stuff that shouldn't see it, I think. Again, this is just a layer. Layer upon layer of paranoia gives you more confidence.

Author: Maybe being more generic in this regard is the best path forward. We could replace the last sentence with something like:
>Keep {es} as isolated as possible, preferably behind a firewall and a VPN.

[discrete]
[[security-dont-expose-to-users]]
=== Implement a barrier between {es} and users
While you absolutely shouldn't expose {es} directly to the internet, you also
shouldn't expose {es} directly to users. The following configurations provide
different methods of user interaction with {es}:

* *Best*: Use an application to make requests on behalf of users.
* *Better*: If the previous configuration isn't possible, use an application to
sanitize requests from users.

> * *Good*: If either of the previous configurations isn't possible, implement

Author: I'll ping @nik9000 again here to help extract the actions users should take for each of these items.

> * *Good*: If either of the previous configurations isn't possible, implement

Reviewer 2: At this point I think only the thing you call "best" is acceptable. Everything else is fraught. Back in the day when I wrote that old advice we had folks wanting to just stick a little proxy in front of ES and try to detect bad searches. That is a losing battle.

Whether or not you have a mediating application, tracking who does what is quite useful. Back when I had ES deployed we allowed trusted folks to run some pretty heavy requests. Sometimes we found they hit it too hard and we had to ask them to stop. But we could only do that because we knew them.

> * *Good*: If either of the previous configurations isn't possible, implement

Author: @nik9000, are there any guidelines that we can provide to users about how to implement an application to make requests on behalf of users? Is there any tangible instruction we can give, or is the an It Depends situation?

> * *Good*: If either of the previous configurations isn't possible, implement

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but I don't think I can articulate it well. In principal, the further you get from a proxy the better. If you can, your application should have total control over the kinds of queries and aggs we build. If your users are "the whole internet" then you *have* to have that kind of control. 

For example, you could just plumb it a user's search term to a `match` query or a `match_phrase` query. Or a  `simple_query_string`. I've used `query_string` for this in the past but it was a mistake. Those queries give you less and less control. But `simple_query_string` was designed for this sort of thing so its quite good for it.

Applications that face the whole internet should run pre-canned aggregations. The internet shouldn't really have any influence there. But it's normal to use things like `terms` and `range` for faceting.

If your users are more trusted, say, because they work for you, the you can do the thing kibana does. They let most things through and even help you write complex queries and aggs. This doesn't scale infinitely, but it does scale faster than an organization can hire.

If your users are in between "the internet" and "employees" then you probably should do something in between.

> * *Good*: If either of the previous configurations isn't possible, implement

Reviewer 2: > For example, you could just plumb it a user's search term to a `match` query or a `match_phrase` query. Or a `simple_query_string`. I've used `query_string` for this in the past but it was a mistake. Those queries give you less and less control. But `simple_query_string` was designed for this sort of thing so its quite good for it.

Its quite reasonable for applications to parse user queries on their side and then build ES queries from there. Kibana does that. I did a fairly basic version of that in my past. It gives you more control. But it isn't required. Some folks will be fine with `simple_query_string`.

some mechanism to track user behaviors, such as requests that are submitted to
specific nodes in the cluster.

[discrete]
[[security-dont-run-as-root]]

> === Create appropriate users to run {es}

Author: Because Elasticsearch checks to see if the user is running as `root` and refuses to start if that's true, we could remove the mention of the `root` user entirely and then focus only on application users instead. What do you think @bytebilly?

> === Create appropriate users to run {es}

Reviewer: I agree, also given the next comment 🙂

Never run {es} as the `root` user. Running as the `root` user provides an avenue
to circumvent the other security layers and permit a user to do *anything* on
your server. {es}  will refuse to start if it detects that it is running as

> `root`, but it's worth double (or triple) checking the user that {es} runs as. 

Author: @bytebilly, I agree that the messaging is strange. This language is from four years ago, and I'm curious if this mention is even worth including in the docs anymore. I'll cc @nik9000 for some history, since he was the original author of this text back in PR [#23930](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/7fad7c675d73a5386d3bdea475c85c083dd68f07#diff-2d6718763cf5a7d5b98beefc23796acd26b8c5c096051ae70a06a4b2f0530b4bR12-R17).

> `root`, but it's worth double (or triple) checking the user that {es} runs as. 

Reviewer 2: Partly we had it in the docs to explain why we added the check.

I agree this doesn't really fit with the conversation about roles and privileges but I don't think it sends a bad message. Its important not to run as root. Very very very important. So important you should probably double check when you first do the deployment that nothing got crossed up. Paranoia is good here. We'll check. We test that we check on every PR. But you should be paranoid here. Its important.

This language comes from a time before we even had a docker distribution and when a lot of folks were decompressing ES and just running it. Our rpm, deb, and docker distributions all create the user automatically. You should double check them because its important, but you shouldn't have to take any more action.

> `root`, but it's worth double (or triple) checking the user that {es} runs as. 

Reviewer: I still feel that the message is too focused on not running as root, rather than to run on an unprivileged user.
What about this more focused and simplified message? (some language fix too)

> Never try to run Elasticsearch as the root user, as this would make any defense strategy not effective and permits a malicious user to do anything on your server.
>
> You must create a dedicated unprivileged user to run Elasticsearch. By default, the rpm, deb, docker, and Windows packages come with an elasticsearch user ready to use for this scope.

<<defining-roles,Define roles>> for your users and
<<security-privileges,assign appropriate privileges>> to ensure that users have

> access only to the resources that they need.

Reviewer 2: It might be worth mentioning verifying the hash and checking the signing key. Supply chain hacks have always been a thing and we've published the hashes since the dawn of time. But they really do happen for real and folks should check.

I know they get those checks for free if the import use our deb and rpm update sites. But lots of folks don't use them.

[[es-security-principles]]
== {es} security principles
Protecting your {es} cluster and the data it contains is of utmost importance.
Implementing a defense in depth strategy provides multiple layers of security
to help safeguard your system. The following principles provide a foundation
for running {es} in a secure manner that helps to mitigate attacks on your
system at multiple levels.

[discrete]
[[security-run-with-security]]
=== Run {es} with security enabled
Never run an {es} cluster without security enabled. This principle cannot be
overstated. Running {es} without security leaves your cluster exposed to anyone
who can send network traffic to {es}, permitting these individuals to download,
modify, or delete any data in your cluster.
<<configuring-stack-security,Start the {stack} with security enabled>> or
<<manually-configure-security,manually configure security>> to prevent
unauthorized access to your clusters and ensure that internode communication
is secure. 

[discrete]
[[security-not-root-user]]
=== Run {es} with a dedicated non-root user

> Never run {es} as the `root` user. Running as the `root` user sheds a layer of
> security in your defense in depth strategy and permits a user to do *anything*
> on your server. {es} will refuse to start if it detects that it is running as
> `root`, but it's worth double (or triple) checking the user that {es} runs as.
> 
> Instead, create a dedicated, unprivileged user to run {es} instead of running
> as the `root` user. By default, the `rpm`, `tar.gz`, `docker`, and Windows
> distributions come prepackaged with an `elasticsearch` user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Never try to run {es} as the `root` user, as this would make any defense strategy not effective and permits a malicious user to do anything on your server.

You must create a dedicated unprivileged user to run {es}. By default, the `rpm`, `deb`, `docker`, and Windows packages come with an `elasticsearch` user ready to use for this scope.
```
